Yei, organized by the Undersecretary Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management. The IDP leaders reported a total of 46,600 IDPs registered in three locations with food, water, and health as their major basic needs. The future intentions of the IDPs remain unclear. UNHCR will continue monitoring their situation. 
 976 pupils already enrolled. UNHCR partner ADSSE conducted monitoring in the schools and found the attendance rate rose from 85 per cent to 92 per cent since December 2016. Some of the schools are supported by ADSSE with payment of school fees, uniforms and school equipment. 

Kalobeyei settlement. A total of 28 cases of SGBV were reported among the South Sudanese popluation, with survivors receiving access and referrals to comprehensive medical, psychosocial, legal and material support. 

Manar, a local partner. However, the mobile clinic service was suspended by the government on 29 January. 
Support remains available to refugees from the open areas through referrals to Tasamuh Medical Centre. 
 (BPWVO) completed vocational trainings for 440 South Sudanese refugees, including 300 women, in food processing, general electricity, plumbing and maintenance. The participants were provided with start-up. 

Ofua I – VI. These structures will enhance community participation on protection issues. A total of 42 UASC have been identified since the start of 2017 and are undergoing BIAs. Seven SGBV cases have been recorded in Rhino Camp, Arua in 2017. All cases were referred to the police and psychosocial support initiated. 

The majority of intimate partner violence cases are related to the selling of family relief items and food rations, and unsafe shelter. All cases were provided with appropriate support, with cases of sexual violence reported to the police. In Palorinya, four cases of early marriage were reported. The survivors were provided with psychosocial support. 
 2,143 refugee youth participated in the dialogue sessions. In Palorinya Zone 1,797 refugees were reached through awareness raising sessions conducted on SGBV prevention and response. In addition, 1,484 solar lamps were distributed in Zone 1 to improve protection and security at the household level. 

In Bidibidi, 413 children at risk were identified, bringing the total number of children with specific needs identified in the settlement to 3,929. Some 49 children were referred for medical attention and 256 were monitored through home visits. In Moyo, 536 children at risk were identified, including 509 UASC, and 168 BIAs were conducted in Palorinya settlement. 

Agojo settlement continues. A consultation was held with the host community of Agojo on the possibility of drilling a production well to extend water to Agojo settlement to serve both refugees and the host community. 

Health: The capacity of the host community medical services, including the blood bank, the Gambella Hospital and services at the Akobo entry point, remains limited. 
Education: There are insufficient numbers of teachers and limited teaching materials available. In the newly established Ngunyyiel camp, there is no secondary school. 

Protection: In Juba, over 100 IDP new arrivals are living in community shelters and have yet to be registered for any assistance. Lack of registration and food assistance remains a major concern for new arrivals, and many arrived to the PoC site without any personal belongings. 
Food security and nutrition: A recent UNHCR assessment in Gorom settlement, Central Equatoria, concluded that the recent lack of rain has severely affected the second season crop harvest. The second season harvest is a key source for supplementing food requirements that cannot be met by WFP food distribution. To improve this, UNHCR and the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry will train refugee farmers on early warning systems. 

Protection: In Arua, the capacity of the police force needs to be strengthened to ensure continued protection of the refugees and host community. Foster families require greater support and foster care arrangements need to be strengthen. In Rhino, there is the need for increased psychosocial support and counselling. In Palorinya, the registration and relocation exercise needs to be expedited. 
Education: Educational structures need to be in place prior to the next academic year. 
WASH: There is an ongoing need to ensure a sustainable and predictable supply of water to the settlements. 

