Tanzania continued to receive well above-average rainfall in January, resulting in favorable agricultural conditions across the country. 
Burundi, eastern Rwanda, and localized areas of eastern DRC also received above-average rains during this period, improving harvest prospects following dry spells during the Season A (October to December) rains. 

Overall, January has been hotter and drier-than-normal for much of the Horn of Africa, following an early cessation of seasonal rains around mid-December. This is likely to result in further deterioration of pasture and water resources, most notably in pastoral and marginal agricultural areas of Somalia, southeastern Ethiopia, and Kenya. 

During the next two weeks, seasonal dryness and hotter-than-normal conditions are forecast to continue in the Horn of Africa, while seasonal rainfall is expected to begin to decline in Tanzania. 

During the month of January, rainfall over Tanzania continued to be well above average by as much as 50 to 300 mm (Figure 1). Eastern Rwanda and Burundi benefitted from above-average rainfall in January, improving harvest prospects following below-average Season A (October-December) rainfall performance. During this time, southwestern Ethiopia, central and southern Uganda, and much of southern Kenya observed significant rainfall deficits of between -25 to -100 mm. 

The poor performance and earlier-than-normal cessation of the short- rains (October to December) season, coupled with a hotter-than-normal dry season in January, have negatively impacted vegetation conditions across much of Somalia and Kenya, southern Ethiopia, and parts of northeastern Tanzania, as indicated by NDVI (Figure 2). Much of Uganda is also showing a very rapid deterioration in vegetation conditions in response to below-average rainfall performance. 

Tanzania continued to receive above-average rainfall in January, further contributing to overall favorable Vuli and Msimu rains in 2017/18. Cropping and vegetation conditions have responded well and crop production prospects are favorable. 

In January, southwestern Ethiopia, central and southern Uganda, and much of southern Kenya observed significant rainfall deficits of between -25 to -100 mm. In Kenya, except for parts of Turkana and Marsabit counties, the rest of the pastoral regions of northern, eastern, and southern Kenya showed poor vegetation conditions. 

The persistent above-average seasonal rains over much of Tanzania are likely to begin to subside in the coming weeks, with moderate to heavy rains (20 to 200 mm) forecast over much of western Tanzania, Burundi, Rwanda, and parts of southeastern DRC (Figure 3). Meanwhile, the same short-term (1-2 weeks) forecast is also indicative of continued dry seasonal conditions across much of the rest of East Africa. 

