December rainfall season is expected to be near normal to below normal, with potentially late onset and early withdrawal. 
This has significant potential to lead to a further deterioration in the current livelihood situation. 

Hotspot woreda classification has been derived using six multisector indicators, including agriculture and nutrition, agreed at zonal, regional and federal levels. A hotspot matrix is often used as a proxy for the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC). 

Livestock-dependent households are struggling to sustain their animals amid parched rangelands and scarce water sources in southern and southeastern Ethiopia. Herd sizes are diminishing across the affected areas, impacting household food security and nutrition. 
Accounts of extreme coping mechanisms are widespread, such as widespread abnormal migrations (significantly increasing internal displacement), skipping meals, reducing portion sizes, eating less diversely and selling remaining productive assets to purchase food. 
Such conditions are particularly pronounced in southern zones of Somali Region. The ongoing long dry season is further enhancing vulnerabilities and compromising the livelihoods of the worst-affected. 
According to Ethiopia’s National Meteorology Agency and the 47th Greater Horn of Africa Climate Outlook Forum, southern and southeastern areas will likely experience little relief from the upcoming October–December rainfall season. The rains are expected to be near normal to below normal with potentially late onset and early withdrawal, meaning a potential further deterioration in the current livelihood situation. Drought impacts are likely to continue at least until the first quarter of 2018, and the full recovery of pastoral households will take much longer – between two to four years, depending on the number and type of livestock lost. 
The rapid spread of the fall armyworm is threatening crop production across the country, having been reported in 411 woredas in six regional states (Amhara, Benishangul-Gumuz, Gambella, Oromia, SNNP and Tigray) as of August 2017. Maize is the most affected, with 22 percent of all maize planted infested (600 000 ha), having significant implications for harvests. There is concern that the pest could soon spread to sorghum-growing areas in Afar, Amhara, Somali and Tigray Regions and likely affect other crops. 
 Destocked 22 189 cattle, sheep and goats, increasing the income of 15 274 households and improving the nutritional intake of 44 356 households. 
Provided animal feed to 46 766 animals belonging to 11 256 households. 
Animal health services delivered to 237 734 livestock owned by 26 913 households. 
Rehabilitating 10 water points. 
Capacity building of animal health workers. 
Support to monitoring of fall armyworm. 
Undertook fall armyworm assessment, with the Government, to determine the reach and severity of the infestation. 
Undertaking seed policy review on request of the Government of Ethiopia. 
Finalized the 2017 Seed Systems Security Assessment. 
Coordination of seed interventions at national, regional and zonal levels, contributing to a more streamlined, efficient response. 
 FAO, in partnership with the Government of Ethiopia, is currently undertaking an assessment on the state of grain markets – including storage, market information, transport and finance – with the objective of understanding current trends and making recommendations to enhance the efficiency of the way grain markets operate. Interviews are being held with key stakeholders, including smallholders, traders and representatives of cooperative unions. The study is expected to assess the flow of grain from farmers to various markets both within and outside Ethiopia, as well as the flow of imported grain to different consumers. 
Once complete, the assessment findings will additionally help to determine the impact of the current grain market on food insecure households. 


